[Music]
hey guys welcome to the K nature
movement podcast today we're on episode
20 with dr. Thomas Seyfried he's a
cancer researcher from Boston College he
looks at how to use the ketogenic diet
and fasting to fight and prevent cancer
this is a really interesting podcast as
well as you want to say thank you for
your continued support we've actually
sold out of adrenal support again and we
will have a back in stock later this
week so I hope you enjoy this episode
and have a good day well good morning
dr. savory thanks for joining us
yeah thank you yeah I'll just preface
this with I was actually in touch with
dr. stayfree when I was starting my
projects that my master's degree and so
I did that in the Q jinuk diet and I
looked at how it affected Abbey City and
breast cancer specifically my lab worked
with breast cancer cells and that was my
project so I initially reached out to
dr. savory and he was very helpful in
pointing me in the right direction
it is definitely a newer line of
research and it's being more carefully
looked at so I know that you're at the
forefront and you have a lot that's
looking at that now but most importantly
what's your background with education
your lab and how did you get started
with cancer which eventually led you to
look at the ketogenic diet as a as an
adjuvant therapy yeah well you know
we've been working on cancer for decades
but more in line with just lipid
biochemistry but we had also had a very
active program in keto for for epilepsy
so we had managed epileptic seizures in
animal models
Yukiko georgette which is where
ketogenic diets are must have been
mostly used as in managing epileptic
seizures so we had learned that the
management of epileptic seizures was
based on reduced glucose and elevated
ketones and the cancer cells are glucose
dependent so you know that they have
damaged oxidative phosphorylation which
would then restrict their ability to
respire fuels so it became a very easy
transition going from epilepsy to cancer
we still don't know the mechanism by
which ketogenic diet stops epical
epileptic
seizures there's a lot of interesting
concepts but it's still far from clear
whereas in cancer it's very clear
I mean cells can't that are dependent on
fermentable fuels glucose is the prime
source of a fermentable fuel and
therefore you take away glucose on you
and you have a good chance of
restricting the growth of the tumor
cells right and so what was the history
behind you know the ketogenic diet I
know that initially you know in the
1920s I believe it was used to treat
absolute epilepsy and then I was
transitioned over as you know a dietary
method mostly because of the diet and
how its primitive in nature according to
you know what we would have eaten up
very long time ago but what was the the
origin of that and how did that get
involved well yeah I started with
fasting by itself so while there at Mayo
Clinic back in the 1920s found that if
you people children or even adults that
were continuing to have chronic seizures
stopped eating drank water only their
seizures would be dissipated and but of
course that's not a long term they were
doing water only therapeutic fastings I
mean you can only do that for so long so
they watched the changes and what they
found was blood sugar went down and
ketones went up so they felt that if you
took a fad diet with no carbohydrates
very little carbohydrates you could
replicate the physiological conditions
of water only fasting and then this
became the probably the most powerful
Metin method for managing epilepsy
epileptic seizures even to this day the
ketogenic diet is primarily used and
accepted for managing epileptic seizures
it's not accepted or understood yet for
managing cancer although it's should be
obvious to anyone that that that knows
the metabolism of cancer it should be
obvious why it works right and you know
taking it back to the metabolic origin
of cancer you know there's a shift
towards glucose the Warburg effect and
and when we initially saw cases of
cancer many thousands of years ago well
I mean
where's Warburg who first who first
identified cancer as a deficiency of
oxidative phosphorylation and we have we
have he is right
it's theory is in fact correct cancer
cells use glucose because they can't
respire so they have to ferment but we
also recently identified the Warburg Q
effect which is that they can ferment
glutamine through gluten analysis
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorylation Warburg did not know
about that but we we've now identified
that as a key so they will ferment amino
acid and they will ferment lactic acid
to generate energy in the absence of
oxidative phosphorylation so Warburg was
essentially correct he just didn't have
all the parts to the puzzle right and
you know looking at it from a new-age
perspective you know we've seen obesity
rates you know skyrocket over the last
few decades the consumption of sugar has
never been higher especially in its
processed and refined form and we see
certain relationships with cancer I mean
initial work done by doll and pedo they
found I believe it was up to you know
twenty five percent of cancer patients
were obese and more recent research has
suggested it's anywhere from thirty to
forty percent of patients with cancer
that are obese and with that obesity you
know you see comorbidities that are
associated with the higher carbohydrate
diet and you know Western populations so
you get things like insulin resistance
that shows up consistently in cancer
patients you see type-2 diabetes that's
been shown up to 20% of patients and so
how do you explain that that recent
trend is it just going back to the
Warburg effect and you know the general
direction that our North American
culture is taking with diet itself well
I mean it's a complicated situation
sugar does the sugar does not cause
cancer sugar is not a carcinogen I mean
now what happens in in in people in some
people who are obese if you look at
their c-reactive protein which is a
marker for systemic inflammation you
find that two BL
in in many people who have type 2
diabetes not all but many people if you
look at see it c-reactive protein is a
marker for systemic inflammation
systemic inflammation can damage
mitochondria in certain cells of the
body thereby increasing the risk for a
tumor so it's inflammation basically
that links it to cancer not necessarily
there's the level of sugar but levels of
sugar that are persistently high produce
systemic inflammation inflammation is
known to damage respiration which is the
first step in the in the path to cancer
it's a two-step process one is damaged
respiration 2 is the ability of that
cell to switch from ox fossa to
fermentation if the cell can't switch
the fermentation it's it's not likely a
tumor could ever form in the first place
so it's only the the two the two
pathways needed to generate cancer right
and you know some of the work our labs
done it was very similar in that regard
where we looked at you know mice we
looked at how the adipose profile or the
fatty tissue affected the cancer and we
found that you know a fatty or adipose
profile actually increased tumor growth
while a leaner adipose tissue
environment reduced cancer growth so
that's interesting that there are
markers outside of just the the sugar
profile or the carbohydrate intake
itself now you know jumping into the
specifics of keto and cancer going a
little bit deeper into the mitochondrial
dysfunction so can you explain that that
shift in in a little bit more
specificity I mean the mitochondrial
shift is that just an inability of these
specific cells to to use the
mitochondria or to up regulate the
mitochondria where did that shift
essentially come into play well if you
look at cancer cells under the electron
microscopy the electron microscope you
just have to look at the number
structure of the mitochondria they're
all
damaged so one of the tenets of biology
is structure determines function if the
very structure of the organelle is
abnormal
I mean you automatically assume knowing
that that organelle cannot function
appropriately so the question is how is
the cells surviving if it's if its main
source of energy is defective they
ferment and that's why when you target
glucose and glutamine you kill them
now the fatty acids need good
mitochondria to generate energy so fatty
acids cannot directly produce energy and
tumor cells
what fatty acids do is they facilitate
the uptake of glucose and glutamine
indirectly and many cancer cells will
store triglycerides as droplets that's
because they can't respire the fatty
acids though they store them because if
they don't store them the fatty acids
will kill the tumor cells so that's why
they're stored as a lipid droplets but
the lipid droplets are not driving the
energy of the tumor cell its glucose
include amine that's driving you take
away glucose and glutamine the tumor
cells a history they died yeah yeah and
so it is your work currently in a lot
you know what what models are using in
terms of animals have we taking this to
human studies yet or is it just in the
novelty no no it's got we we we vet
everything first in the lab with
glioblastoma and metastatic cancer
systems and then we work with physician
groups around the world to implement
these kinds of strategies in the clinic
so in Egypt and Turkey in in Hungary and
in the United States we're starting to
consider clinics that will treat cancer
as a metabolic disease all based on the
concept that glucose and glutamine are
the drivers of the disease so you have
that you have to retrain physicians and
you have to restock you have to do a lot
of things differently than what we're
currently doing right and I mean for at
least from what I've seen it correct me
if I'm wrong some of the most promising
research has been glioblastoma brain
tumor specifically do you know if
there's reason why certain cancers may
respond yeah we don't know any cancer
that doesn't respond okay because they
all have the same disease every cancer
is the same disease they all have
defective risk for
so if it's a blood cancer they're gonna
be sucking down massive amounts of
glutamine and glucose if it's a breast
cancer colon cancer bladder cancer brain
can't they're all the same so I mean
when you look at the mitochondria of any
kind of a cancer it's damaged under the
electron microscope so you look at
breast look at colon look at liver look
at brain they're all they're all damaged
mitochondria have to ferment so cancer
is one disease it's a fermenting disease
and you can starve it to death by taking
away the fermentable fuels and it
doesn't make any difference where it's
located or what tissue or these kinds of
things right and do you think there are
limitations of it for example in things
like lung cancer or cancers that maybe
have an adequate oxygen supply or maybe
have you know adapted over time to using
alternative fuel sources there are no
other alternative fuel sources in
available you have to realize that in
order to drive an inefficient system you
have to have an abundance of the fuel
source okay so cancer cells can
metabolize other amino acids the problem
is they're so few and far between
there's not enough of them and it
requires energy to metabolize them for
energy whereas glutamine is pure energy
it requires no metabolic management so
it goes right into the system yeah so
there are no other a fuels abundant in
the micro environment that can drive the
that can drive the disease except
glucose and glutamine so those are the
two prime fuels when they are deprived I
don't know of any cancer cell that can
survive in the absence of those fuels
all right that's very interesting and I
know you mentioned briefly the research
field within pets animals specifically
dogs and cats and I saw one of your
presentations where you you showed a dog
that I believe it was a tumor on its
snout yeah and you put it on the
ketogenic diet and you monitored that
tomb over time and it basically
disappeared over the course of however
many months that you had this dog on a
ketogenic diet now I know we we used the
term ketogenic diet a lot and in my
opinion it's unfortunate because I don't
really think that it's a diet I think
it's a very natural way of eating that
our bodies respond to
we we our most optimal in that regard I
know the counter-argument for a lot of
people is that well I can eat carbs and
I don't die so how do you explain that
well tolerance and health optimization
is a hell of a lot more different than
just being able to tolerate and digest
something physically just because it
doesn't kill you doesn't necessarily
mean that it's right for your body so
you know we see the same thing with pets
and the way that we feed them I mean the
pet industry has industrialized
mass-produced pet food the same way we
feed ourselves in North America I mean
if you look at kibbles and bits and you
look at some of the biggest you know pet
products and what they're putting their
food I mean the reason it's cheap is
because it's processed grains and you
know cats and dogs if you look it's not
only it's not only processed grains it's
processed recycling of dead dogs and
cats as well
that's had the phenobarbital got into
the kibbles and bits and the gravy train
and those other things so you know you
euthanize animals in the shelter's and
then the bodies are recycled back into
the food you know they've been pulling
stuff off the market on that and that
dog that we put on on metabolic therapy
is still alive is still doing well so I
think we're going to make major headway
when we start to treat dogs with cancer
we should be able to really move fast on
resolving cancer and dogs because they
they're a good source they we can we can
manage that without harming them you saw
them from that one more and more of
these dogs are doing really well because
dogs did not evolve to eat grains and
sugar and all the crap that the that the
that the dog food companies are putting
into these foods and they're killing the
dogs just as well as they're as we're
killing ourselves with these foods so
yeah so once you go back to all-natural
foods with the what the they all came
from wolves so wolves are primarily
carnivores and you give them natural
foods
related to their species and many of the
elements disappear and dogs live much
much longer you know you can get them
out 15
years on the appropriate food when on
the crap that they're giving them in
most of these vet foods you know these
commercial dog foods are very unhealthy
and Rodney have been from Canada has
been a real proponent of natural foods
for dogs and he has a dog cancer series
showing how all these poor dogs are
dying and suffering from the from the
the types of foods the inappropriate
foods that we have been giving these
animals right and I mean you see the
same thing with humans and you see the
same thing with cats and dogs you end up
developing certain issues that you know
could lead to cancer for example
inflammation but you know we're putting
humans on celebrex for joint pain when
in reality they're inflammation is a
direct you know cause and effect from
their high carbohydrate diet you know
they're just having way too much bread
and carbs in there in their diet and
basically by cutting that out and I've
seen it you know through people around
me and people that we've talked to where
they're off medication within a week or
two of switching to a more heavily
carnivore based diet maybe not even
fully cutting out their carbohydrate
sources but just cutting out there were
fine carbs yeah and I think that you see
the same thing with cats and dogs I
think the reason that their lives are a
bit shorter than they should be and you
know the same thing I see people putting
their cats and dogs on so many different
medications by the time they're eight
nine ten years old and to me doesn't
make sense I mean strictly speaking from
a biological or evolutionary standpoint
how would these dogs have survived and
lasted so long if they needed to be on
medication by the time that they were
eight your soul it just doesn't doesn't
make sense to me no well I mean it
doesn't make sense to most people who
think about it but you know the dogs are
getting sick they are given medication
just like humans and most of the time I
don't know about all vets but you can
check with Rodney Habib about that he
seems to be in the in the trenches with
respect to the kinds of natural foods
Karen Becker and Rodney had been at a
Canada are big into the whole concept of
sick dogs from the types of foods
they've been he
yeah and onto the are the most abused
creature on the planet from the very
time they start weaning they never
really eat a natural what they're
supposed to have and as the result of
this you get all these you know the same
kinds of problems that we have the dogs
have and they're all dying very early
you know they've got all kinds of
problems so but if you give them natural
foods you can significantly increase
their lifespan and health right and if
you look at you know that the digestive
system from nose to tail I mean we're
very similar to canines and I think that
if people were to incorporate a more
heavily me based diet instead of you
know shoving down as many slices of
toast as they can their diet I think
that we'd all be a lot better off as a
population we're you know we're probably
the most technologically advanced in
North America yet we fall behind in
almost all categories of health in
general I mean the number one one of the
number one causes of death in men is
cardiovascular disease which in my
opinion is a direct effect from the
amount of refined carbs that we do have
in our diet I believe that if we had
switched over to a more heavily based
diet it's you know took out the amount
of oats and toast and at least minimized
that I think that we would you know
drastically changed mortality rates
amongst men and women in North America
which is a sad thought really that
that's what we're fighting against well
yeah and but that's part of our that's
part of our advance as civilized society
and you're I agree with you I mean we're
many of us and are addicted to glucose
it's like it's like a drug and and it's
permeated our entire food chain in
almost every way and as the result it's
very hard to go back and eat the kinds
of food we would be doing like 10,000
years ago hunter-gatherer kinds of
things
don't forget humans evolved to eat
almost anything there on them yes that
we can we survive because we can eat
almost everything but don't forget
glucose was always the preferred taste
it's sweet and you'd only get it from
ripe fruits or honey or something like
this but now we can process and put
sugar into almost everything
so consequently and the meets unless you
get organic meat some of these meats are
tainted with hormones and all kinds of
other things too so it's not always the
purity that you're that you're looking
for unless you can be sure that it's an
organic and you know people when you
talk about meet people like tender meats
right so yeah you know if you eat if you
eat free-range stuff
what cows or whatever it's a lot more
gamey and tough you feed cows corn corn
fed cows makes the meat very tender
because it masks the massive ant acid at
digestion and their gut when they give
them corn and then you have to use
antacids to reduce the acidity and
whatever that does it makes the meat and
their body very soft and tender this is
abnormal this is a complete aberration
you eat buffalo meat that's grazed on
grass it's a very different than buffalo
that's eaten corn you know but people
like this softly so I can cut this meat
with my fork well you you shouldn't be
able to do that in the first place you
know but it's really good and it's soft
its tender its juice the corn and so
again you got to be careful of the kinds
of meats I mean the whole system is just
you know modified for Western technology
yeah you know and you mentioned
something about the addiction to glucose
and you're absolutely right I mean for
for anyone that's had a chocolate bar or
a piece of candy it's really hard to
deny really have how good it tastes and
that's because fruit itself tastes great
and honey does as well and now you're
talking about processing that refining
it and really squeezing as much as you
can into a concentrated form so it's a
hard thing to kick especially when you
grow up as a child and a lot of our
pleasure centers are built around that
so you know you win it you win a
baseball game you go out for ice cream
it's your birthday you get a birthday
cake you know when you're sad you open
up a tub of ice cream so I think
socially we've also grown to attaching
our pleasure centers around
carbohydrates and and simple sugars
along with the addiction that it
provides
that is um you know a dual form I think
a way of us really latching on to sugar
and having a hard time kicking that
habit you're absolutely right I do
believe that it's an addiction similar
to anything else drugs or alcohol now in
terms of sugar and and kind of how
people threw it under the rug and
started to blame meat in saturated fat
can you dive a little bit about the
history and correct me if I'm wrong but
there was a time I believe it was in the
60s where the American sugar Association
I was working with Harvard researchers
in order to you know publish data on
saturated fat that was maybe misinformed
and to promote sugar as a natural
healthy form of fuel yeah but I can't
really speak to that as well as as other
people might be able to do like David
Ludwig and David Diamond and these kinds
of guys they they're they're more into
that the history of this and and you
know what happened there with respect to
the shift over to a more carbohydrate
based diet but you know I'm not into
that you know my I'm into killing tumor
cells without it and the rest of the
body that's what we do now we can
prevent cancer or we can treat cancer
the question is how you got to do that
without harming the body and that's
we're where we are right now right and
so for someone if you had to give piece
of advice for someone who say they were
they were dealing with cancer and they
were looking at other forms of therapy
that were a little bit more natural in
conjunction with whatever they were
doing let's say it's radiation or
chemotherapy is there advice for someone
who maybe before taking the leap to a
full ketogenic diet you know are there
things that they can do to kind of help
their situation and the response to
therapy yeah I don't know it's really
it's really a hard thing to say because
you know the whole system is geared
towards toxicity when it comes to
managing cancer you know it's it's a
it's a good point you know why why are
we why are we poisoning ourselves or why
is why is some professional' trying to
poison a cancer patient to make them
healthy
you know they want to stop the
proliferation of cells that are out of
control but those cells can't grow if
they don't have energy so if you target
their energy source they'll die just as
well as being poisoned and I use the
term poison because a lot of these kids
a lot of these chemo therapies are in
fact poisons people are trained to
deliver these very toxic compounds just
to killed it so you don't actually sit
fine threshold between killing the whole
burning the whole house down and killing
a few cells and many cancers come back
because they they ferment it's not that
they're tough you don't never take away
the fuels that drive their proliferation
that means that you always have the risk
of them coming back and each time they
come back the body is weaker and weaker
and can no longer deal with the problem
and people die
the immunotherapies that are new that a
lot of people think are going to save
them and some people rightly are saved
but many are killed as well so you
should never really treat anybody with a
therapy that has a remote possibility of
actually killing you and that's
essentially what's happening in our
cancer field is that many of these
therapies could actually put you at risk
for death from the theta from the
treatment itself and that should never
happen I mean this is like nothing but
yet this is what everybody thinks is
going to save them and then they go
through and find out at the end it's not
working and that's the and it's all over
but not for everybody we have a lot of
camp people who've survived cancer using
toxic poisons and radiation
the problem of course is that their
bodies have now been subjected to
toxicity which itself is not healthy for
long-term survival you end up with a lot
of other other ailments as the result of
being subjected to chemo and radiation
and then that puts you at risk for all
kinds of other mal including
cardiovascular disease neuro psychiatric
problems all kinds of things so the
whole system is just like upside down
it's a it's a failed system and that's
the reason why we have 1,600 people in
the United States dying every day from
cancer and that tells us that it's a
fail
yeah yeah yeah I agree with that and you
know I guess the last thing would be I
you know you can't really give medical
advice on cancer over a podcast but
looking at you know different cancers
and the Juvenal a general piece of
advice or guidance that you could give
to people with cancer I mean sure that
they'd be trying a ketogenic diet on
their own should they be going through a
doctor I know you said people are
working on clinics specifically for that
but say someone doesn't have access to a
ketogenic diet clinic targeted toward
cancer and then their doctor says oh no
this is a ridiculous fad you know don't
even look into it you know what what
advice would you have for people I don't
really think this might work for them
yeah you raise a very important point
it's it's a tragedy that the oncology
community is not aware of or understand
the mechanisms by which these things
work and the other the other problem of
course that's afflicted this whole
entire field is the word diet and
historically in medicine diet has always
been a very amorphous ambiguous kind of
thing in the first place nobody knows
what all the components of a diet we
don't we try to steer away from the term
ketogenic diet in preference to
ketogenic metabolic therapy which is a
very different situation in the sense
that patients are put into therapeutic
ketosis which is ultimately what puts
the pressure on the tumor cell and then
they then we hit them with glutamine
targeting and hyperbaric oxygen but it
has to be done in a very strategic way
and the tragedy of course right now is
that there's almost no one very few
people in the entire planet that know
anything about this or how to do it and
they're not trained to know about this
they they think cancer is a genetic
disease when it's not so you're
subjecting your patients too horrific
toxicity in in the lack of knowledge on
on what the biology of the disease
actually is and it will take
considerable time to retrain the entire
field
into knowing so in the meantime these
poor people have to go to the top
hospitals and be surgically mutilated
poisoned and irradiated to make them
healthy and that should not happen but
it happens every day only because the
the the people that are supposed to be
treating you don't don't know about this
this kind of stuff hmm yeah I mean I
think it's gonna take take time for sure
and you know luckily we have people like
you that are putting their time and
effort into bringing awareness to it and
really I guess you could say dialing it
in to make sure it's the most effective
and efficient way of treating cancer in
the most natural way but yeah that's you
know that's all very informative I want
to thank you again for coming on to chat
with us
it was great and you know just in case
you want to let people know if they can
connect with you or your lab where they
can find you and your university as well
yeah well I mean I'm at Boston College
so and we also get funding from the of
the foundation for metabolic therapy
Travis Kristofferson you might want to
consider speaking to him someday he
wrote a book trip over the truth which
is the emergence of the the field of
metabolic therapy for cancer so because
it's it's not easy to get funding to do
things to help resolve the disease it's
you know it's to study cancer but you
know to resolve it it's another thing
altogether but yeah so so we continue
our research we continue working with
medical groups around the world and
hopefully we'll set up the kinds of
clinics in this country and abroad that
will allow cancer patients to be managed
without fear of being subjected to high
toxic therapies so this is the future it
has to be the future because the current
path is a failed one and and I think
people will benefit immensely once once
they come to know about all this yeah
that's great okay thank you again doctor
okay it was a pleasure chatting with you
and enjoy those three weekend yeah
thanks bye Joe thanks take care talk
soon
[Music]